So my name is Chuck Pisula,
and just like everybody
else here from Apple today,
I'm here to help you.
And in particular,
I'm here to help you learn about Cocoa.
So, let's give you an idea, again,
what Cocoa is.
It's an advanced object-oriented
framework designed from the ground
up using objects and many powerful
object-oriented methodologies.
It provides you a full feature set
for doing application development,
and it integrates well with
other system components.
It's not a standalone component.
You can use any of the POSIX APIs or,
as you heard Scott say earlier,
actually integrate with parts of Carbon,
like the print panels actually
comes up through Carbon.
And it's used by many important
Mac OS X applications.
System Preferences was written in Cocoa,
the Mail application, Project Builder.
Let me set the stage for what
you're going to learn today.
My goal is to tell you
what makes Cocoa unique.
By doing so,
we're going to talk about some of
the important classes in Cocoa.
We can't talk about all of them.
There's a lot.
And we're going to discuss some
of the main concepts and features,
in particular those that make
Cocoa unique and powerful.
Above all, I want you to learn
that Cocoa is powerful,
easy to use,
and can make you more productive.
Cocoa is powerful.
It's an object-oriented framework
designed from the ground up,
using objects and those
object-oriented methodologies.
You'll notice some of these slides are
similar to earlier slides you saw today.
I'll have to learn next year not
to do them so early so that they
can't be reused by people before me.
So they're designed for extensibility,
again, like Scott said, so that you,
the developer,
can make changes without a lot of effort.
And we use a dynamic runtime system
that makes many things easy to do
that you might not even consider
doing with other frameworks.
It's easy to use because we have
consistent APIs and conventions,
again, in Objective-C and Java.
And again,
those of you who are not familiar with
Objective-C shouldn't be frightened.
It's something that,
it's a small extension to the
ANSI C-based language to support
things like objects and messaging.
And if you're familiar with
object-oriented programming
and the C-based language,
you should be able to
learn it in a day or two.
Now, we also have brought up this
line count thing many times.
So one measure of
productivity is line count.
It's not the only one,
but it's a measure of productivity.
So what can Cocoa give you for free?
Well, in fact, with no lines of code,
you can actually have a
reasonable text editor.
Now,
I know most of you out here are not in
the business of writing text editors,
but what this means is that
this is an example of what
Cocoa can give you for free.
And the idea here is that although
you're not writing text editors,
you want to get lots of stuff
for free so that you don't
have to reinvent the wheel.
This means you get more time to work
on features which make your product
unique and helps you sell your product.
So at this time, I'd like to bring
Doug Davidson up on stage.
He's going to show you how to write a
no-line text editor and sort of show
off what you get for free in Cocoa.
Doug?
Good afternoon, everyone.
I'm here to show you how easy
it is to get started writing
great applications with Cocoa.
So we're going to write a
Cocoa application from scratch right now.
So let's fire up
Project Builder and get started.
This will be a
Cocoa document-based application,
something along the lines of simple text.
And we'll let Project Builder
create a project for us.
Now, the main thing we get with
this project is a couple of
interface definition files.
So let's take a look at
those in Interface Builder.
The first one has a window for us where
we can put the contents of our document.
With Handy,
your document content is here.
Since this is going to be a text editor,
Well, the thing that I want to
put in here is a text view.
So I'll just drag one in off the palette.
And I'll position it the way I want.
I want to size it the way I want.
And I want it to grow
when my window grows.
For that,
I have to set a couple of springs.
And let's take a look at the
attributes our text view might have.
We've already got-- it's editable.
That's good.
Multiple fonts allowed.
That's also good.
How about graphics?
That would also be nice.
And undo.
That's useful.
And the other one has our main menu.
Let's also take a look at that.
Here's our main menu.
Now, since this is a text editor,
I think I would like to have a text menu.
So I'll add that and a font menu.
Let's see.
Let's try building it.
This is always a moment of truth.
Built.
That's good.
Let's see if we can run it
straight from Project Builder.
And here is our application.
What did we get?
We got a document window,
or maybe two or three,
that we can type into.
Let me make that a little bigger for you.
That's better.
And this has a lot of the standard text
type features that you might expect,
like copy and paste or drag and drop.
[Transcript missing]
Or we can drag in inline images.
Let me make that a little bigger.
[Transcript missing]
Built right in.
And we also have a ruler with
some various formatting options.
And there's one more thing.
You notice this little close
button up here has a document
dirty indicator in it.
That means that our application
has automatically noticed
that we edited this document.
And if we try to close it,
it will ask us if we
want to save changes.
And it will bring up a save panel,
a little one or maybe a big one,
whatever we like.
You can try to save.
Oops, didn't save the document.
What's missing here?
We didn't write any code.
We forgot to add any code.
Well, at this point,
I have to admit that Cocoa can't
do absolutely everything for you.
You would have to write a little code
to be able to open or save documents.
But with an additional
less than 20 lines of code,
This text editor would be able
to open and save documents
in a variety of formats,
and we would have a full
working text editor.
Now back to you, Chuck.
Thank you very much, Doug.
Now, again, the point of the demo was
not to show you that you can
write a text editor real easy.
Well, you can, but most of you aren't
going to be doing that.
The point was to show you that you get...
Lots for free in Cocoa.
And if you're like me,
you like getting stuff for free.
Like Will Shipley was
up here earlier saying,
you don't enjoy writing stuff
that's been done hundreds of times.
You want to do new,
unique stuff that's going to
make your product really cool.
And that's what Cocoa allows you to do.
So let's talk about some more, I guess,
more realistic applications,
like some of the stuff you
guys are going to be writing.
We have the mail application on Mac OS X.
It was written in about
75,000 lines of code.
Again, you see this probably
rehashed a couple times now,
but I just want to reiterate
it because it's so important to
understand that you get compact code
size and still lots of functionality.
So of those 75,000 lines of code,
15,000 are actually comments.
So that leaves us with
about 60,000 lines of code.
Of that, 40,000 are written in
reusable frameworks.
Now this means that they're
not specific to mail.
We're actually reusing them throughout
Apple so that we write it one time and
multiple applications get to use it.
That leaves only 20,000 lines of code
for this mail application that are
specific only to that mail application.
Many of you are familiar with OmniWeb.
OmniWeb is a full-featured
Cocoa application.
It's a web browser, and it was written in
300,000 lines of code.
Now, at first,
this might sound like a lot,
but I've been told by the OmniWeb folks,
who are generous enough to
give me the line counts,
that 120,000 lines of code are there only
to support about five various plugins,
like Flash and so on.
So that leaves us with half the
code only to support a couple
of plugins that we're in C.
That leaves about 170,000
lines of Cocoa code.
Of that, 140,000 of them are written
as reusable frameworks.
So you're noticing a theme here,
where typically in Cocoa,
you're able to write your code,
some of it factored out
into reusable frameworks.
Now,
Omni actually posts this on your website.
You can go and check
out the code yourselves.
And they address things like networking,
the web, HTML,
and some custom controls that they're on.
So that leaves,
for a full-featured web browser,
only 36,000 lines of code.
Again, very compact, yet full-featured.
Okay, so let's leave,
that's a bit of the motivation
as to why you might be
interested in checking out Cocoa.
Let's talk about where Cocoa fits.
You've seen this many times.
You've seen at the lowest level is
the cherry-flavored Darwin pill.
Above that, we have maybe lime-flavored
graphics of Quartz,
OpenGL, and QuickTime.
And then, like Scott talked about,
we have many programming environments,
one of which is Cocoa,
its own tasty little component.
So Cocoa, in a little bit of detail,
it's actually divided up into two layers.
We have the foundation,
which is typically non-UI classes,
and the app kit,
which are the UI classes.
And the app kit gains its graphic
capabilities from application service,
which, again, is Quartz, QuickTime,
and OpenGL.
Cocoa is full-featured.
There's a lot of classes here.
In fact, there are 220 or so classes.
So we don't have time
to talk about all today.
Some of you have already picked these up.
If you go to Hall 2,
there's these references
that you can use.
I guess they're cheat sheets.
Just try and hide them
conspicuously on tests.
So again, we're not going to have time
to talk about all this today,
and I just want to point out
what some of the stuff that
we're not addressing today are.
Cocoa is, again,
broken up into the foundation
and app kit layers.
APCAD addresses things
like windows and views,
graphics and imaging,
events and system interaction,
a number of classes for text handling,
which were shown off in the earlier demo.
Then in the foundation level,
we have classes for basic
storage and collections,
abstractions for dealing
with file input and output,
for dealing with operating
system mechanisms,
such as processes and threading,
and networking and communication,
and then some others.
Okay, so let's dive into the
foundation now in detail.
At the root of the foundation
is a class called NSObject.
In fact,
you'll notice that all classes in
Cocoa start with the letters NS.
Brief history lesson:
this actually stands for "Next Step"
because Cocoa was a Next Step technology.
So maybe this is a lesson for
including company names in your APIs.
I don't know.
Foundation, again, is below the UI level,
and it provides basic classes
for storage and collections,
operating system abstractions to make
dealing with the operating system easier,
and our core support for
internationalization and localization.
And while I talk about the Foundation,
I'm also going to touch on some topics
which are important at that level,
in particular, memory management and the
concept of mutability.
So, we have basic storage and collection
classes for things like values,
NSStrings, which store Unicode strings,
NSData for storing a bag of bytes,
collections that you're typically
used to from CS-type classes,
you know, arrays, dictionaries, and sets.
And what's important about these are
that they have very consistent APIs,
and they can be written to
files as property lists.
Now, let me explain property
lists a little bit,
because we've only
been talking about XML,
not property lists.
Now, property lists are basically a
simple object graph that we use
when we write out the files.
And these are defined using,
the format is defined using XML.
In fact, if you're interested,
the DTT is on the system.
Now,
property lists are a deal as a small,
flexible data store.
And for that reason,
as has been mentioned a couple times now,
they're used throughout Cocoa and
Mac OS X for things like user
preferences and configuration files.
Now, we also have abstractions for
dealing with the operating system.
And I use the term
"abstraction" a lot today,
and I want to define what I mean by that.
By abstraction,
I mean we have a higher-level interface
to gaining access to this functionality.
It doesn't mean that the
functionality is any less powerful.
It just means that it's easier to use.
Now, we have abstractions for dealing
with the operating system,
such as threads and locks.
For doing file input and output,
things like NSURL, or NSFileHandle,
for dealing with files.
We also have classes that
help you do networking,
communication,
and for accessing system information.
Now, there's lots of classes
and functionality here,
but if your needs are exceptional,
you can always use any system-level
framework or POSIX APIs,
for instance, so that, again,
Cocoa is not a standalone product.
You can use it with other
components in the system.
Internationalization is
very important in Mac OS X.
Obviously, we're able to ship seven
languages simultaneously.
The way we're able to do this in
the Cocoa frameworks is through
our support for Unicode data,
which is in NSString.
Now those of you who are used
to using the Carbon APIs may
have heard of CFString.
NSString is a very, very similar class.
It's basically just a small
shim on top of CFString.
So NSString stores Unicode data,
which means it can support
any language that Unicode can.
And for that reason,
we use it throughout our
APIs instead of basically char stars.
Now typically,
localizing your application involves
more than just converting strings.
You also want to convert your images,
so a stop sign in the US might not
make sense when you're running in some
other language or some other country.
So you need to localize
things like images and,
in fact, your UI.
So NSBundle provides
our support for that.
NSBundle is just a resource loading
mechanism that knows how to rummage
around your app packaging system and
find the appropriate resources for the
user's currently selected language.
It's also just a general
resource loading mechanism,
but for localization,
this is what you'd use it for.
Okay, so that covers some of the
basic classes and functionality
at the foundation level.
Now I want to talk about some
of the concepts that apply
at the foundation level.
Memory management is important.
Cocoa does not use automatic
garbage collection.
However, it uses something just as
simple and easy to understand.
It uses reference counting.
So the basic idea is here that when
you send an object a retain message,
that adds a reference to the object.
When you send it a release,
that decrements the
reference to an object.
When the reference hits zero,
the object will get deallocated.
Now, the basic rules of our
memory management is simple.
By convention,
only creation methods return
objects that have a retain on it.
All other methods return objects that
temporarily don't have any references.
If you want to keep that object around,
you send it a retain.
When you're done with it,
send it a release.
And again, once it has no references,
it goes away.
Immutability is also a very
useful and important concept
at the foundation level.
Many classes in the foundation
are mutable classes,
which means that they can be modified.
Or we have some that are immutable,
meaning that they can't be modified.
So why do we have a distinction?
There's a couple reasons.
Immutable objects can't be modified,
which means it's safe
to pass them around.
I can pass you an immutable array safely
if I know you can't add objects to it.
I might need to know
that it's not changing,
which means I can also return
immutable arrays from my API to
external clients and safely know
that they won't be modified.
Immutable classes could also
have more efficient algorithms.
If I know an array is
not going to change,
I might be able to do something
more efficient in my implementation.
However, the drawback, of course, is,
well, they can't be modified.
Not much use to pass around arrays
that you can't add things to.
So, for that reason,
we also have mutable objects.
And for that reason,
lots of classes at the foundation
level come in both flavors.
So,
we have NSStrings and NSMutableString.
And, in fact,
you'll notice the same things, you know,
similar classes at the
core foundation level.
Mutable classes and non-mutable classes.
So, it's a concept that we
use throughout Mac OS X.
Okay,
so that covers non-UI functionality.
I, myself, am a graphics guy.
I love doing graphics.
And we're all Mac programmers here.
Who likes to do great graphics?
Okay, everybody's third.
Okay,
so the app kit again is where we have
our UI level layer and our graphics.
It provides the infrastructure
for drawing and handling events,
and also provides many of the
components that you're going to use
off the shelf in your application.
We have basic controls like
buttons and check boxes,
advanced controls like the toolbar,
and we also have standard
dialogues like color panel,
save panel, open panels,
and we have many advanced Aqua features
such as drawers and transparent sheets.
And again, as you saw earlier today,
Cocoa features a very
sophisticated text system.
So here's a diagram showing some of the
classes that I'm going to touch on today.
Again, only about five of those 220.
I'm going to start by
talking about NS Application.
Because everybody's writing application,
so everybody has exactly one
instance of NS Application.
Now, NS Application is important
because it manages your connection
with the Windows Server.
It'll set up the connection, and when the
Windows Server receives events,
it'll dispatch them to the application,
who then will appropriately forward
them off to whoever needs to get them.
NS Application is also important because
it gives you hooks to customizing
typical application behavior.
So, for instance,
if you need to customize and do something
special in application termination,
there's hooks for you to
customize that behavior.
Okay, everybody has an application,
so they got an NS application.
Everybody also typically
will have Windows.
And then Window is the guy who reserves
screen real estate and provides you
a place to put your topmost view.
Ennis Window is also the guy who
Application will forward events off to,
and then it will figure out,
based on the event,
who needs to receive that.
So clicks go to the view under the mouse,
key events go to whichever view currently
wants to receive keyboard events.
Through some of the magic that
you heard Scott talk about,
we can dispatch these keyboard events
off to dynamically figure out what
object wants to handle keyboard events.
And again,
Ennis Window is where you'll find our
support for advanced features such
as drawers and transparent sheets.
NSView is where you're
going to do your drawing.
NSView handles lots of details
that you don't want to handle.
So some of you might
really enjoy this stuff,
but typically most people don't want to
worry about managing the view hierarchy,
worrying about coordinate
system transformations,
view to screen transforms,
or worrying about clipping.
It's all done for you in Cocoa.
Also,
NSView provides basic UI functionality
that you're used to having around,
like, drag and drop,
context-sensitive menus, and help tags.
Again, off the shelf,
there are many instances of NSView that
you can just use in your application,
such as NSTextView,
which you saw Doug use earlier,
or NSMovieView,
which plays QuickTime movies,
and there's a number of other views.
Now, if you want to make your own view
that does your own whiz-bang,
custom, really cool drawing,
all you need to do is subclass
NSView and override the methods
that you're interested in.
So if you want to draw,
which you're all going to do,
you override drawRect.
If you want to handle mouse-down events,
you override mouse-down.
Any other event that you want to handle,
you just override that
method in order to handle it.
NSView is where you do your drawing,
and Cocoa provides you lots
of options for drawing.
In particular, we have NS Bezier Path,
which allows you to
do path-based drawing.
Lots of things that you're familiar
with with path-based drawing,
such as curve to point, stroke fill,
set a dash pattern.
NSImage is our class that provides
an abstraction over images.
So we support images like TIFF, JPEG,
bitmaps, anything else that you typically
would expect QuickTime to support.
And the nice thing here is that
it's an abstraction on images,
so we can add support for new images,
in fact, which we have in the past,
like PDF, and your application gets that
new functionality without even
knowing that it existed previously.
We also have the ability to draw strings.
So strings know how to draw themselves.
A class I haven't mentioned
yet is NSAttributedString.
That's our abstraction on styled text.
We also have abstractions
for colors and fonts.
And again, in the past we've added
functionality for things like
pattern colors or true type fonts.
And we've done this without
changing the API in those classes,
so clients have been able to pick
up new functionality without having
any idea that it would have existed
at some point in the future.
And if you need to do your
own graphics transforms,
we have NS Affine Transformation.
Now, there's lots of options for drawing,
but if your needs are exceptional,
you can always use Quartz drawing.
Again,
Cocoa is not an isolated component.
It can use other
components in the system.
Sony CG functions can be used.
At this point,
I'd like to bring Doug back up on stage.
He's going to give you a demo on
how to actually subclass NSVU,
how to draw, and how to handle events.
Doug?
Thanks, Chuck.
OK.
Now, this time, I promise we're actually
going to see some code.
So what we're going to do
right now is what might be the
beginnings of an image editor,
perhaps.
We'll draw an image,
and we'll allow the user to click and
drag to make a rectangle selection.
So I've already created
the project for us.
And here in Interface Builder,
instead of a text view,
I put in a custom view and set it
to be my custom subclass of NSView.
Back in Project Builder,
let's take a look.
I've added a few lines already to the
implementation of my custom subclass.
Actually, just two methods.
For demo purposes,
I have hard-coded a specific image.
Now, really, the only interesting line
In this code so far is this one.
And this is in our draw rect,
our custom draw rect method.
And what this line says is
that we want to draw the entire
image in our entire bounds.
And that by itself is
enough to draw the image.
But we also want to do the
click and drag selection thing.
So let's add some lines.
First of all,
I'm going to add a couple of instance
variables to keep track of where
the user has clicked and dragged.
Keep track of the start
point where the user started,
click,
and the end point where they drag to.
And next, what I need to do...
is add just a couple of methods
to keep track of those things.
So first of all,
I have my mouse down method.
That's going to be called
automatically when the user clicks.
And all that this method does is
to set both the start point and the
end point to the location of that
mouse click in our view coordinates.
And then we say that we
need to read Redisplayed.
And then we have another method,
mouse dragged.
Which will be automatically
called when the user drags.
And all that does is to set the endpoint,
just the endpoint, to, again,
to the location the mouse was
dragged to in the view's coordinates.
Now, given these two points,
it's fairly straightforward to compute
the rectangle that they determine,
and I have a little
function that does that,
too.
It's about as long as the
rest of the code in this app,
actually.
I'm going to insert that.
The final thing we need to do is
actually draw that selection rectangle.
So let me get that.
I'm going to add that to our draw rect.
And what this says is that if the start
point and the end point are not the same,
then we set an appropriate color,
in this case red.
and create a Bezier path.
In this case, the path is just a rect,
being the rect determined
by those points,
and stroke it.
Simple enough.
Let's see if it builds.
Let's try running it.
Now, here's our application.
It draws the image that I've hard-coded.
Notice again it scales nicely,
automatically, no code needed for that.
And I click and drag,
there's my selection.
Thank you again, Doug.
OK,
so now I've talked about NS Application,
NS Window, and NS View.
And the attentive ones in the audience
have noticed I've skipped one class.
That's everyone, right?
NS Responder is the common
superclass of all these classes
I've already talked about.
And the reason is they all share
some similar functionality.
In particular,
all NS Responders can receive events.
And again,
events in Cocoa arrive as methods.
So if you're interested
in keyboard events,
your subclass of NS Responder
will override the key down
event -- key down method,
excuse me.
NS Responder also introduces
another important concept
called the Responder Chain.
And every subclass of NS Responder
can be in this Responder Chain.
Now, the Responder Chain works like this.
Every window knows who
its first responder is.
Every responder knows who
its next responder is,
and so on down the line.
And so this forms a responder chain.
What will happen is,
when events come into the system,
they get dispatched, typically,
to the first responder.
If it doesn't want to handle it,
it gets passed down the
responder chain until it finds
someone that wants to handle it.
So typically,
you're probably not interested in knowing
about actual very low-level events
like mouse clicks or key-down events.
You're really concerned with,
was this button clicked,
or was the slider manipulated,
things like that.
This is where NSControl comes into play.
As you can see, NSControl is a subclass
of NSResponder and NSView,
which means it inherits lots of
functionality from these classes.
However,
NSControl has some important differences.
NS Control is defined as something
that's typically triggered
or activated by user action.
Again, button clicks on a button,
a click on a button.
Examples would be NS Button,
NS Text Field, or more advanced controls
even like Outline Views.
Now, again,
I said it inherits lots of functionality,
but it also has some
important differences.
Every control has a target
object and an action method.
I'm going to get into this
in detail in a little bit,
so let me just leave that for now.
Controls also have values
that can be queried,
so I might need to know that the
slider's current value is 0.5,
or that a text field's current
string is something or other.
Also, since controls are typically
things that I can click on,
I need to be able to enable
them and disable them.
So control has support for that.
Target action is a very
important concept in Cocoa,
and this is what makes some of
that magic that Scott Forstall was
talking about earlier possible.
The idea here is that when
a control is triggered,
it has a target that is going
to tell I was triggered.
So the target object is the guy
that gets sent an action method.
In Cocoa, targets can be nil,
and when the target's nil,
the message will go to
the first responder.
And again, if the first responder doesn't
implement that action method,
it goes down the chain until
it finds someone that wants it.
So,
this is how cut is implemented in Cocoa,
typically.
When the user clicks and drags
down to the cut menu item,
we haven't actually
hard-coded in a target.
The target's nil.
And so what will happen is,
the frontmost window, its first responder
will get a cut message.
If it doesn't actually implement cut,
it'll go down the chain until
it finds your custom view,
which implements the cut message.
So again,
you can imagine how much gory detail
and management you'd have to do
if you had to actually manage who
the current target was and keep
track of what window's in front.
That's all taken care of you
through the beauty of the first
responder chain and target action.
At this point,
we'll bring Doug Davidson back
up on stage,
and he's going to show you how
target action works in Cocoa.
Thanks, Chuck.
So this time, we're going to build on
our previous example,
and we're going to add an action
method to our custom view.
And to do that,
we're going to pay a little
closer attention to scaling.
So I'm going to add a few
A little bit more code here.
Now, first of all, I have one method,
setScale.
It will set the scale on our
view to some float value.
Now, in Cocoa,
every view has two rectangle parameters.
One is its frame,
which determines it in the
external coordinate system.
And the other is its bounds,
which determines its size in
the internal coordinate system.
So to scale this view,
all that we're doing is setting
the frame size to be the
size times the scale factor,
and setting the bound size
to be our original size,
just the hard-coded size of the image,
and again saying that we need redisplay.
And also, when we get loaded,
we want to set the default
scale to some value of 1.
Now, our action method is this one.
called Take Scale From.
And what that does is to set our
scale based on a value determined
from the sender of the action method.
In this case,
we're going to have the sender
of the action method be a slider.
The value of the slider is just
determined by the position of the slider.
So the slider will tell the
view what its scale should be.
Let's take a look at our
interface in Interface Builder.
Now we're going to take our view,
and I want to group it into a scroll view
so we make sure we can always see it.
Let's make this window a little bigger.
Move this thing around a bit.
Now, here I'll get a slider, drag it on,
position it the way I want it.
I've set some nice values for it.
It goes from 0.5 to 1.5,
and it starts at 1.
Now I need to hook this up.
Here's the magic of Interface Builder.
I'm going to drag,
saying that the target of
my slider is my custom view,
and the method it's
called is takeScaleFrom.
Now let's see if this will build.
[Transcript missing]
And the slider tells the
view how to take its scale.
If it's too big, we can scroll around.
We can still make our selection.
And we're all set.
Thank you very much.
Let me assure you that Doug doesn't
normally program using stickies.
Some of the beauty of what
you saw here was that because,
again,
Objective-C has very good introspection,
Interface Builder knew that it has
these methods that it can wire together.
So we've talked now a lot about
classes and specific functionality.
And although that's some of
what makes Cocoa powerful,
it's some of the concepts that
we use in Cocoa which make it
really unique and powerful.
So I want to talk about, in particular,
some design patterns that
are used throughout Cocoa.
In particular, the notifications,
sometimes referred to
as the observer pattern,
delegation,
and the model view controller paradigm.
Notifications are a way to broadcast
happenings throughout an application
or even to other applications.
Those interested in knowing about a
happening will register as an observer.
Typically, in Cocoa,
some of the things you can
register as observers for are,
"Tell me when a window will
close," or "Tell me when a text
did begin editing." However,
you wouldn't expect notifications to be
used for really low-level things like
"Disc did spin," or something like that.
So observers have to register
with somebody to say,
hey, tell me when this event happens.
That guy is the notification center.
Notification center is sort of the
glue that makes notifications work.
What happens is, observers register with
the notification center,
telling them the name of the
notification they're interested in and
the object that they want to monitor.
And also,
they provide a method to be called
when the notification is posted.
Now, you don't actually have to tell it
what object you want to monitor.
You can say,
"The object I'm monitoring is
nil." And when you do that,
you say, "I want to monitor all objects
for a particular notification."
So I might want to know when any
window in my application closed.
I do this by specifying nil.
Posters are the ones who
post the notification.
They post the name and any additional
information which may be valuable.
For instance, what window is closing.
Delegation is a powerful design
pattern that allows one object
to act on behalf of another.
Typically,
it's a way to provide you a way
to customize an object's behavior
without having to subclass.
So, NS Application has a
number of delegate methods.
One called Applications Should Terminate
and Applications Open File.
So if I want to customize
my applications termination,
I provide a delegate who
does some special work in
Applications Should Terminate.
Okay, so at first,
notification and delegation somewhat
sound like similar concepts,
and they are because you're sending
messages when things happen.
But they have some important differences.
With delegation, there can only be one
delegate per object.
Much like with the Highlander,
there can be only one.
However, there can be many observers.
And because of this,
you'll notice that with our APIs,
delegates typically
receive should messages.
They're allowed to affect
behavior because there's only one.
However, notification observers will
receive will or did type messages.
There's no way for you to affect it.
So let me give sort of a
contrived example of making a U.S.
law.
In this example, the House makes the law,
and we'll say the President's our
delegate in this situation because
he's allowed to veto the law when
he's asked should the law pass.
Now once the law finally passes,
all of us out here as notification
observers learn about it through
the notification the law did pass.
It did pass.
We don't have any way to affect it.
Of course, there's always voting,
but we know sometimes that doesn't
actually work in all places.
Okay, so another design pattern that we
use throughout Cocoa and has already
been mentioned a couple times is
the model-view-controller paradigm.
In this paradigm,
the model stores the data.
However, typically it's more than
just a simple data store.
It knows how to perform intelligent
operations or business logic or
things like that on the data.
However, it's separate from the view.
It doesn't know any particulars about
any view that it's being displayed in.
The view knows nothing about the data.
It just knows how to display
typically some simple types,
but it's separated from--
The Cocoa APIs are a powerful
tool for creating full-featured
desktop applications for Mac OS X.
The Cocoa APIs include low-level utility,
system interaction, internationalization,
internet,
and platform independence classes,
as well as a rich set of
user-interface components and a
powerful and extensible text system.
This session provides an
overview of Cocoa APIs.
So I'm going to talk a little bit more
about it in the next couple slides,
and I'll usually talk about
it and just call it MVC.
Okay, so I'm going to hit on a number
of application-level topics,
some which MVC affect and some which
are just application-level topics
that you'll be interested in when
you're developing your application.
In particular,
if you're writing a document
sort of application,
Cocoa has a wonderful document
architecture that you'll be
interested in knowing more about.
Every application on Mac OS X should
have undo support and be scriptable.
And typically,
you're going to want to be able
to talk to the clipboard or have
preferences in your application.
OK, document architecture.
It provides you a number of standard
features that you want to have in an
application that works with documents.
As you saw earlier in Doug's demo,
we had a document-based application that
ran open panels and save panels for us.
We didn't write any code to do that.
It also managed the
document edited status.
Again, these are mundane things that you
typically don't want to have to reinvent.
Now, for you to make a
document-based application,
all you're going to have to
do is provide routines that
can load and store the data.
Again, stuff that we didn't
do in the earlier demo,
but you provide the
custom logic to do that.
Undo is very easy to do in Cocoa,
and for that reason,
every application should be undoable.
In fact, every Cocoa application,
as you heard before,
already has undo support.
In particular, the text system has
built-in undo support.
And if you need to add
your own undo support,
all you need to do is that
when your model changes,
you register an undo operation
with the NSUndoManager.
And again,
since undo typically wants to be
registered when your model changes,
a good separation of your model and view
will make undo easy for you to implement.
Scripting is also very
easy to implement in Cocoa,
and again, that means every application
should be scriptable.
Cocoa provides a lot for you already.
We handle events from the
Apple Script Standard Suite,
such as Open Print and so on.
The text system provides a number of the
classes that you need in the text suite.
And if you need to add your
own support for scripting,
which you're all going to do,
You don't have to do a lot of work.
You have to edit a plist,
which again is this
XML-based file format,
and you need to write a method or two.
So it's very easy to do, and again,
since scripting acts through
interfaces through the model,
a good separation of the model and the
view makes scripting easy to implement.
Typically, your application also
wants to have preferences.
When you need to store preferences
to disk or read them from disk,
you can talk to the
NSUserDefaults object.
It stores preferences
per user per application.
It also allows you to
access system preferences.
So anything you see stored in
the system prefs application,
you can access through NSUserDefaults.
And also,
if you have a suite of applications,
NSUserDefaults allows you to
share preferences between them.
If you need to implement cut, copy,
paste, or something similar,
you need to talk to the
clipboard or provided data,
right?
And its pasteboard is the object
that gives that functionality.
In particular,
the data can be provided either
immediately or in a lazy fashion.
And of course,
we all prefer to be lazy because
if we have some huge data,
we don't want to have to
compute it if it's never needed.
And its pasteboard also has
filtering services so that you can
convert to the requested formats.
And in fact,
we provide conversion of Mac OS 9
types for you automatically.
Okay, we covered a lot of stuff today.
I made this thinking it
might be earlier in the day.
I guess it's actually time to eat.
What I'm hoping you take from the
talk today is that Cocoa gives
you lots of functionality.
You don't have to reimplement mundane
tasks that aren't interesting to you
and don't add value to your product.
You get to spend time working on features
which will help sell your product.
Cocoa has lots of powerful concepts.
More than just the classes and
the functionality of the classes,
we have powerful concepts that we use
which make Cocoa unique and powerful.
And again, I love free stuff,
and Cocoa gives you lots of it.
So it's day one,
and we've got a lot of sessions
left if you're interested in Cocoa.
In particular, I would highly recommend
going to the Using Cocoa talk.
There will be lots of code demos there.
We didn't show a lot today.
We're going to show a lot more there.
The Advanced Cocoa talk is
actually for beginners to
Cocoa and Cocoa experience folks,
so everyone should feel
free to attend to that.
And if you have feedback,
come to the feedback session on Friday.
There's also a couple more things
you might be interested in.
The project builder talk coming up,
interface builder,
and learning about things such as NSURL.
Again, one of these foundation
classes that I talked about.
There's lots of documentation on your CD.
The first thing I would recommend
checking out if you're new to
Cocoa is the concepts documentation,
because that, again,
is what I think makes
Cocoa unique and really powerful.
There's lots of information elsewhere.
There's your O'Reilly
book that you can go grab.
And actually,
there's lots of Cocoa enthusiasts out on
the net that provide things like mailing
lists and fax and free frameworks.
Again, Heather Hickman is your
contact for anything Cocoa.
There's a new Cocoa Development mailing
list that if you're
doing Cocoa Development,
you should look into subscribing.